Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Caroline Wisner. She's professor
of Complexity Sciences at the University of Potsdam. And
today we're going to talk about her book, What
is a Complex System. So, Doctor Wisner, welcome to
the show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
Pleasure is with me. Thank you for having me.
OK, so let's start perhaps with a bit of
background here just for people who are not really
familiar with the topic to get a little bit
more familiarized with it. So, what is complexity, science,
how old is it? Tell us a little bit
about it and its history.
Yeah, happy to. Complexity science is not a very
old science. On the contrary, it's it's quite a
recent science. And I suppose one of the reasons
is that it relies on other sciences to have
been around at the time. 11 could say that
complexity science really is from the 1980s, and of
course that can be debated. Um, AND the sciences
that were very, you know, played a big role
at the time where things like well dynamical systems
theory. Uh, CYBERNETICS, um, systems theory in general, cellular
automata, and, and more broadly, um, computer science, which
was quite a recent science at that time, actually.
So, um, the origins of complexity sciences are, I
would say, found in the 1950s, 1960s, 1970s around
those sciences which I'm happy to talk more about.
Um, THERE was a theory of probability, statistical methods,
that, that was all, um. PLAYED a huge role
for complexity science to come about. And the uh
availability of computational power really made it possible to
think about complex systems the way we do now.
Because complex systems, or yeah, um. Complex systems are
very much data driven, because they rely so heavily
on a myriad of uh observations to be made
about tiny little things that together give something. Interesting,
um, and I'm sure we, we talk about more
examples throughout our conversation. Um, THAT I would say
is complexity science is the Observation, modeling and prediction
of systems that consist of many, many elements with
many, many interactions that together form something that the
individual elements could not, um, some behavior that is
emerging out of these interactions. If you like, I
say a bit more about um. What people would
consider the starting point of complexity science, and that
can be argued, of course, um, but one point
in history where we could pin it down if
we wanted to is in the 1980s where people
started to think about, well, these, I'm not sure
I used the term emergence yet, but sooner or
later we will have to um emerging phenomena that
were Observed in computer programs were seemingly from very
simple rules, suddenly something emerged that was not built
into these rules directly, but it came out of
um out of these rules as a as a
consequence of many interactions, feedback. Um, NOISE to, uh,
in, in some cases. And these cellular automata were
studied and people started to think about, well, how
come that these very simple things can can exhibit
such interesting emergent behavior, the um The game of
life might be familiar to some people in the
audience, which is, which is really just a computer
program, and it doesn't even have any noise in
it. And yet it looks like on the screen
things start to become alive, whereas really underneath it
it's just a collection of a small collection of
very simple rules. So they studied this. At a
workshop in uh Los Alamos in the United States,
um, and pretty much in parallel to that, there
was a workshop also. In in uh in New
Mexico, where they wanted to find out the synthesis
between the sciences. So these similarities that we're observing
in terms of emergent structure. Uh, THEY were, you
know, pioneers really in the field that, that, um,
got together asking, well, what are the, what is,
is there a new kind of science here? Um,
AND in particular, So this, I'm, I'm just, I'll,
I'll say a few names, um. The workshop was
organized by uh John Cohen, and uh White House
science advisor, and um what, I think I said
John Cohen, George Cohen is the right name. And
out of this, they thought, well, actually, is there,
you know, is there something else that can emerge
in terms of bringing sciences together? So here we
have the science of dynamical systems, computer science, and
of course biology. And they wanted to think further
ahead even is there emerging sympathies in the social
sciences, in anthropology, psychology, I mean this was really
pioneering, um, a pioneering effort, and that happened in
1983 and 1984. So here one can argue that
the the complexity signs as a research field began
in earnest. Standing on the shoulders of dynamical systems,
um, computer science, system science, cybernetics, of course. And
one thing I find interesting about this initial effort
was they were really not just thinking about what
is the science here that that is, you know,
is, is, is asking us to be done. But
can we make a teaching institution out of it?
And so PhD granting institution, that was the original
idea and the ambition of these these people. Um,
SO these people, I, I mentioned one of them,
George Cohen, Phil Anderson, uh, Charles Bennett, uh, Murray
Gell Mann, um, um, Stan Farmer, uh, Stephen Wolfram.
So it was, it was really a collection of,
it was physicists, computer scientists, economists. Who had this
idea And this is part of what complexity science
is. It is a way of thinking, which is
why it's so important to have it as a,
you know, as a teaching subject because you learn
to think in certain ways. How, how does structure
emerge in systems. That are seemingly very different, but
appear to have a similar process of um structure
emergence.
So, but you mentioned different sciences or scientific disciplines
like systems theory, cybernetics, dynamical systems theory. How do
they relate to one another and to complexity science
more generally?
Yeah. The um So cybernetics is um you know,
it's founded by Va and Osenblut in, in the
40s. And they called it a a theory of
control and communication in living and non-living systems. So
Vena is was an engineer, was was a biologist,
and they got together realizing that it looks like
there is a commonality between these non-living engineered and
the living biological systems, and they made this actually
quite um precise also using mathematics, calling it cybernetics.
Because the principles of, of control in these systems,
you know, how do I control the hand movement
versus how do I control the flight of a
rocket, which of course in the 40s was quite,
quite um At the forefront of people's thinking. Appears
to be very similar and What does that have
to do with complexity science? It is this synthesis
between two fields, in this case, engineering and biology,
where by digging down one finds common principles that
hold in in both and that can be described
with similar, if not even the same mathematics. And
that is true for this is something that complexity
science strives for to find these synthesis, so, uh,
using the same mathematics, using the same type of
model for systems that are physically speaking very, very
different. So, that is cybernetics in the 40s. Um.
And then there is uh the systems theorist Ludwig
von Better Landy, who, I mean, he already started
before um before the 40s, and his, I suppose
his, his main contribution is the book General Systems
theory. Where he does exactly that, he's looking for.
A general approach, or yeah, a new approach to
science as such in not being specific in these
disciplinary silos, but looking for general principles that that
hold across uh different systems, universal principles and laws.
And that also is something that complexity science strives
for, um, so the modeling, the mathematical description, but
also identifying general principles that hold across different systems,
universal principles, um, and laws. And then last but
not least is dynamical systems. That um took off,
well, you know, one could say in the 70s
um with Lorenz's work on the uh on, on
chaos. It is, so there are two connections, I
would say between complex systems or complexity science and
dynamical systems theory. One is that complex systems generally
are dynamical systems. Just broadly speaking, they move, they
change over time. And because of that, many of
them are modeled using the tools from dynamic assistance
theory. The other connection between the two is that
both of them rely heavily on the availability of
computational power. The the types of, you know, strange
tractors that people discovered at the time. They could
not be studied in earnest without computational simulation, and
the same is true for complexity signs. It could
not exist without computational simulation, and of course, in
addition to that, more and more important data analysis,
computational data analysis. So I would say those are
the main strands between those sciences and uh complexity
science.
But now to address the question posed in the
title of your book, what is then a complex
system and what characterizes a complex system?
Hm. Yes, that is the question. And there is
Well, we, we didn't want to give a single
sentence answer because systems, complex systems. They, you know,
by nature cannot possibly be captured in a single
sentence. And yet in the end we we condense
everything down to a single sentence just to help
the discussion along, and I will start with that
simple sentence and then I'll unpack it a little
bit to hopefully communicate that there is a lot
inside of that sentence, so. Complex systems are systems
that exhibit some, but not necessarily all of the
features, um, spontaneous order and self-organization, nonlinearity. Robustness, nested
structure and modularity, history and memory, and adaptive behavior.
So I admit that was a very nonsense. Um,
AND what we're doing in the book is we're,
first of all, you know, distilling these features and
to this day, nobody has come along and said,
look, you've forgotten a feature. Um, SO, so far
so good. And the main idea in distilling these
features is also asking what are the principal ingredients,
so something that actually all complex systems, but not
only them exhibit is numerosity, disorder, and diversity. Feedback
And non-equilibrium. Now, out of these emerges, and here
comes the term emergence in uh these other features
that I've just mentioned, um. And I Suppose it's
an open question. Um, TO ask whether these features
I just mentioned numerosity disorder feedback. ARE Only necessary
or are they also sufficient conditions. So if you
find them in any system, then necessarily other things
will follow such as self-organization or um or memory.
So that's an open question. um, BUT this in
a nutshell is what complex systems are. The key
is really the key starting point is in the
numerosity. So complex systems involve many interactions among many
components. That is also something which um We try
to distill in Well, no, the, the last thing
that the last sentence doesn't quite make sense. I,
I'll, I'll take that out. Um, SO far, so
good. Short answer to what is a complex system.
And are there different kinds of complex systems?
Yes, short answers, yes. Long answers just by thinking
about um these features, so. If I start At
the end of the list I mentioned, at the
end of the list there was the term adaptive
behavior. And in fact, Um, some would always use
the term adaptive together with complex systems, adaptive, complex
adaptive systems. And adaptivity, however, presupposes something which is
um alive in, you know, in the broadest sense.
And to us, complex systems don't have to be
alive, so there are systems that we classify, we
meaning my uh co-author James Layman, the philosopher, and
I. Um, CALCIFIED complex. Um, BUT they're not living,
so just there you have different types of complex
systems. You have those that have exhibit adaptive behavior
and those that do not simply because they don't
exhibit any behavior. Um, SO that's, that's one way
of, of thinking about different kinds of complex systems.
Generally, you could say, well, those that exhibit, for
example, nested structure versus those that do not. Um,
YOU could say there are different kinds of complex
systems.
And I mean earlier you mentioned emergence. How does
emergence relate to complexity and in what ways are
complex systems non-reducible?
Yeah. Emergence is often mentioned as a kind of
a definition, right? So, um, a system is complex
if it exhibits emergence, and then you ask what
emergencies, and they say, oh, emergencies if something complex
suddenly arises. So that's not terribly helpful. Um, We,
if we take emergence to be just, you know,
the very simple, um, Uh, Phil Anderson put it
as more is different, which is a beautifully condensed
way of thinking about it. Um, Which means that
Uh, The whole, so a collection of particles, a
collection of people, a collection of something, many elements
behaves in a way that the individual parts, so
the parts in isolation. Cannot, do not, and, and
possibly cannot. Then you have something that emerges. No.
What does that have to do with what I
just said about features? The, um, if you take
as the basics that you have a system that
has many elements, uh, with many interactions, there is
stochasticity in there, which in nature there always is.
And because there's so many interactions, there is then
also feedback between them, um. And out of that
emerges something which is not. Um, SORT of captured
by Talking about many elements interacting, and that is,
for example, the emergence of structure. Um, And that
is such a key, the emergence of structure spontaneous
self-organization is a key feature of complex system, and
that emerges out of the individuals, individual elements. And
emergence of structure. And even structure at different scales,
which makes it even more interesting. There is one
type of emergence that we observe in complex systems
that now we study. There is also emergence of
dynamics, uh, structure is something static, but it could
also be structure in time, right? And then you
have emergence of dynamics, you have emergence of laws,
universalities, um. I mean, physicists love phase transitions, so
you could say that's a kind of an emergence
of a universality, universal behavior. Out of the many,
you know, local interactions um between atoms, molecules. So
that is the main connection between emergence and a
complex system. And your question about the non-reducible. Is
Is a good question and it's directly answered by
that the systems as a whole behave in a
way that the elements in isolation cannot. So. The
thing is you find these non-reducible properties in Not
just in living systems. So in living systems, I
mean, one of my favorite examples is an ant
colony where you put thousands of ants of the
same species together. And they form a social system,
right? They have distribution of labor, they, they, um,
um, you know, they stay alive over years and
years, although the individual ants do not stay alive
for that long, but the colony as a whole
has has a lifespan longer than the individuals, um,
and all of this, you know, very fascinating um
behavior that they exhibit. Cannot be exhibited by a
single ant. And even more so if you put
just a few ends, you know, I don't know,
a handful or so often. They would not form
that social structure and they would simply die of
starvation, which, which is a, you know, I think
it is in a nutshell what um why why
these systems are not reducible. And similarly in in
a physical system which we can also think of
as complex systems, um, we could say that the
the ideal gas laws, so that is a relation
between pressure and temperature and volume, which is super
fundamental physicists learn it in the first year, um,
at university, if not earlier. And these properties are
simply not assignable to a single atom, so something
has emerged here, a form of, well, in this
case, a law which is not reducible to individuals,
individual atoms.
So, uh, I mean, we're going to walk through
some examples of this, but what kinds of scientific
disciplines this complexity science applied
to? I would have to think hard to find
a discipline where it cannot be applied to. I
could find disciplines where it has been applied to
successfully and for a while. Um, AND that is
certainly biology, neuroscience, um. And um more and more
uh social systems, um, In, in the, to the
extent where we can get quantitative data. It is
beginning to be applied to um Psychology. And other
related uh areas. So, The reason it's so broadly
applicable is that this type of emerging structure, emerging
dynamics, emerging laws, is so universal. Um, SO one
could rather ask, You know, why has it come
about so late in the in the history of,
of science, which is, you know, it's just what,
50 years ago, um. Um, AND Yeah, I mean
that it's a difficult question. I don't think I
have the full answer to that. Um, IT'S very
much data driven, so as we get in more
and more data on systems where we, we do
observe some phenomena on the, what I like, you
know, what, what physicists and and others like to
call the macroscopic um level. We simply because we
don't have the means to, to measure on the
microscopic level. So let's let's take this, um, let's
take the example of The ideal gas law where
on the macroscopic level, you know, people have been
measuring for centuries, pressure and volume um and temperature
and then realized, oh, there is actually, you know,
a very clear mathematical relation between them, but it
took a while until it was first hypothesized and
then actually measured in the lab the constituents of
these gasses, the individual. Atoms and molecules. Um, AND
And that led to, you know, first thermodynamics and
macro uh um uh statistical mechanics came along as
the underlying microscopic theory that explained the macroscopics. And
a similar development, I would argue we're observing in
these other sciences, so we can now measure, you
know, movement of individual people simply because we have
all these, you know, every single one these days
has has a mobile phone is often giving access
to where they are, whom they call, and so
on and so forth. So suddenly we can start
to think about the microscopic theory of these things,
um, and we realize that. Yes, there are similar
emerging laws. In, you know, be it, even, even
in physics, we can still think about it that
way, chemistry, biology for sure, uh, behavioral biology, and
all the way up to um all sorts of
human behavior.
So let's go through some examples of scientific disciplines
that complexity science applies to. Uh, HOW about ma
and physics more generally? I mean, could you tell
us a little bit about how complexity science applies
to physics?
Yes. That's a that's almost the hardest question. You're
starting with the hardest question because um Um, it's
easy to answer in what way does physics, you
know. In what way does physics aid the field
of complexity science, um. And that is easier because
so many tools from sorry from physics are being
used to study complex systems that are not considered
to be just physics systems, um, and statistic mechanics
which I've just described or which I've just mentioned,
a theory of, of phase transitions, critical phenomena. They
have all been studied for decades in physics, and
now the same concepts and Uh, even more important
to say mathematics can be used for non-physics systems.
Um, And In what way does complex systems apply
to physics? I almost went down with it. Even
try to answer this. Um, Rather, I put the
question slightly differently, which is in what way do
the concepts of complex systems apply to physics? And
here, um, I mean, here we're right in the
heart of self-organization, right? Self-organization of non-living things because
physics generally is about non-living things matter. Um, SO
if, if we go to the universe, which is
full of structure, I mean anything from, you know,
galaxies to star systems to uh clouds of dust
and me and whatnot, I'm not an astrophysicist, but
there's plenty of that, I know that. Um, WELL,
how did it form? It formed through self-organization and
the different forces that are involved, you know, we,
we know a lot about them now, um, of
course, gravity. Uh, IS, is an important one in
this context. They form the interaction between these particles.
And you just put in, that's the beauty of
physics, you just put in a few very simple
laws, not trivial, but uh. Um, VERY compact laws
and out comes a myriad of different structures. So
that is self-organization, and that is why also physics
and the theory of non-living matter is effectively um.
Can be thought in through the concepts of of
complexity science. Have I answered your question.
Yes, I, I think so. I understand that it's
a bit complicated. So, uh, let's move on to
another area. How about the climate science? I mean,
what is it about the climate that we can
have a better understanding of through complexity science?
Yeah. There is climate science is, is really one
of the areas where complexity science plays a role.
And there are several reasons for that. Um, ONE
is that what complexity science is very good at
is The one thing I talked about already is
this this form of self-organization. There's something else which
is that a complex system is, is, is never
isolated from its environment. Um, WHICH physicists like to
do, so they're very good at. Isolating a system,
putting it in vacuum or whatever, and then um
studying it, and that is simply not possible with
the the climate as a whole, we can't put
it in the lab and isolation, obviously. But even
parts of it, um you can um To some
extent you can isolate certain processes, so um. Let's
say, I mean, you can isolate the uh dynamics
of the weather from the dynamics of the climate
because there are different time scales. But even that
is, um, the time scales are overlapping. So 11
challenge with climate is that it acts on Time
scales and length scales that are overlapping. So you
can't say, oh this happens on the nanoscale, this
happens on the, you know, dissolvable meters, and the
rest is happening on thousands of kilometers, and in
between is nothing. That is simply not the case.
Which means that All of these time scales and
length scales do interact with each other. That is
one of the challenges, if not the challenge in
in Describing modeling predicting the climate. And here complexity
science is equipped because it is, it has the,
the concepts and also to some extent the methods
to think about that. Um AND the methods, you
know, they involve dynamical systems, they involve um network
signs which is explicitly bad interactions where you can
then talk about different. Um, um. Lengths and time
scales and model explicitly how they interact with each
other, so. Um, That's why complexity science plays such
a big role in, in, in climate science. Not
least through network theory. Mhm.
So earlier you gave the example of ant colonies.
In what ways are social insects complex systems? And
I would imagine this would also apply to other
kinds of animals, but focusing now specifically on new
social insects, uh, could you tell us about that?
Yeah. You social insects are just super. I'm not
an expert, but I was, I was lucky enough
to read, you know, people's, uh, books by, by
people who really know. Um, Deborah Gordon, for example,
um, knows everything about ants, I think, and Um,
what makes them a complex system is that they,
they really, in a nutshell, Exhibit what complex systems
do is, which is you put a lot of
entities together that individually Can't do that much. Um,
SO ants, for example, um. An individual ant, well,
it, it can walk and it can, you know,
it has senses, so on, but it, it could
not survive on its own. Um, YOU put 1000
of them together and they have, for example, a
modular structure in terms of the division of labor,
right? DIVISION of labor by definition, a single and
it can't divide labor. Um, SO that is something
that emerges out of the interactions, out of stochasticity,
um. And The That's, that's the, the social aspect,
right? DIVISION of labor is something that is social.
Group Exhibits or can exhibit. Um. And they I
mean, we can go through all of the features,
in fact, that I mentioned earlier on and think
about ants, and they have it all. I mean,
the numerosity is, you know, is a given, thousands
of them together. The disorder is actually something which
is key here. Uh, IT'S, it's there in every
complex system, and here it's there because the, I
mean the way an ant walks is not deterministic.
Um, THERE are, you know, always disturbances, perturbations, um,
it either meets another ant or it doesn't, um.
And all of that leads to feedback between how
ants move and what they perceive in their local
behavior. So there might be, for example, looking for
food and then they meet another ant which signals
that it has just found food, which then leads
to coordinated behavior between these two ants. So there
is It starts with the disorder, feedback comes in,
and then out comes uh spontaneous self-organization and um
That's, I mean, that leads to nonlinearity, which is
an abstract term, but it, one way to think
about it is that um You know, more leads
to more so. A few ants discover a good
food source. Well, they recruit more and more ants
to the same food source and so what started
out with one ant becomes a lot of them
uh going to the same food source. Um, And
that is a is is is a form of
feedback which leads to nonlinearity. And It suggests that
it might make these systems very unstable, right, because
all the ants suddenly run out to the food
source, none of the ants will be left in
the nest and, you know, an intruder comes and
destroys it, whatever. Um, BUT that is not what's
happening. um. Because there is also another type of
feedback. I mean, there's so many types of feedback
here, but certainly to, uh, there's a positive feedback
and the negative feedback. So the negative feedback means
that the whole thing stays stable. Um, ON, on
the level of the system. Because there are other
needs inside the nest that are communicated through these
often stochastic interactions, always stochastic communication. Um, AND that
leads to a robustness of the system as a
whole. I mean, there could be, um, You know,
you could, for example, uh. Scoop up Ants from
outside of the nest. So suddenly no further food
is coming in and the ants that were originally
there to, uh, you know, to tend to the
nest and to the eggs and so on. They
realize no food is coming in, no water is
coming in, and then eventually, you know, stochastically one
after the other will. VENTURE out to get water.
Um, SO they will actually change. The uh task
they had because of the interaction with the environment.
And that is a form of feedback, um, and
that leads to a robustness. So, and, and on
and on and on, of course, adaptive behavior, that's,
it's one form of adaptive behavior. They have it
all, um, eusocial insect colonies have all the features
of complex systems.
So there, there are also, I suppose, many kinds
of different social phenomena that occur in human societies
that we could talk about here as examples, but
let me ask you specifically about the economy. Is
the economy also a complex system, and if so,
in what ways is it a complex system?
Short answer to is the economy a complex system
is yes. And why is it a complex system?
It's Yeah, I'll give a short summary to begin
with and then we, we could go a bit
more into detail of the features, um, because the
list of features is helpful. So the short answer
is that the economy exhibits. Um, EMERGENT behavior, emergent
dynamics that the individuals cannot. So for example, a
boom or a bust of a stock market, a
sudden crash of, you know, certain stocks, is something
that emerges out of a myriad of individual decisions
that are usually the result of interactions between different
traders. So none of these traders individually decides, OK,
uh. Uh, WELL, they, even if they decided to,
they couldn't make it happen on their own, right?
So the, the trader in isolation cannot exhibit a
boom or a bust, can only be in the
collection of many traders together. And the simple rules
that exist between them, which is If there's something
to sell, then somebody else can buy it. So
that in a nutshell is, is the reason why
I talked about the financial economy, but the economy
in general is a complex system. And um the
longer answer would be then to go through these
different features. So, for example, Um, one feature I
mentioned is nested structure. Um, SO at different scales,
do we have structure that is then part of,
you know, structure at a bigger scale. And certainly
with the economy we start with individuals that, you
know, every household is an economic entity if you
like. Um, THAT is part of a bigger economic
entity, which would be a neighborhood where, you know,
there's a certain number of shops and people go
and buy stuff, um. And that is part of
a bigger entity, which is, say, the national economy,
which is part of a yet bigger economy, which
is the international economy. And the um. The interactions
are of different types. Uh, SO one interaction is
just, you know, buying and selling actual goods. Another
interaction could be um financial dependencies, um, or other
dependencies dependencies uh in terms of, of raw materials
and what not. So there are all these different
interactions within a level and between levels. Which means
that it becomes actually quite, on the one hand,
quite difficult to predict. Um, SO if everybody suddenly
starts to buy tulips, then, uh, you know what
happens to the tulip market? Well, it's probably gonna
crash. Um, But That the economy usually is not
that simple, and so predicting something such as the
economic crash or crisis in parts of the world
in 2008. WAS was actually predicted by some, but
the system as a whole was not prepared and
did not see it coming. Um, BECAUSE it was
the result of many individual interactions. In this case,
interactions as in the financial dependencies because some had
bought debts of others packaged in complicated ways, and
out of these myriad of interactions, suddenly a housing
crisis emerged and a bigger financial crisis as a
result of that.
So you've mentioned earlier on that in more recent
times, complexity science has also been applied to the
study of human psychology. So, could you give us
perhaps some examples or tell us more broadly about
how complexity science also applies to human psychology and
the study of the human brain in neuroscience?
The second one is much easier than the first.
Um, OK, I cannot talk much about psychology. Well,
I, I, I can't really talk about it at
all. I know that psychologists are beginning to use
complexity science, um. Because there is structure such as
Um, you know, psychological, psychological traits are sort of
emerging as key, key categories in how people behave,
but really I feel I know way too little
about that to comment properly. Um NEUROSCIENCE is much
easier. To me Um, because the obvious complexes, and
the brain is, is, in my view, is the
most Complex system. Although it a brain on its
own doesn't, you know, can't survive. It has to
be part of a a body. Um, BUT the
brain consists of these, um, depending on, so humans,
um, you know, millions of tens of millions of
neurons. Um, And they are as individual cells, you
know, they can't do anything. Um, I mean, potentially
they could conduct some current and that's it. Um,
YOU put tens of millions of them together and
you get something like consciousness, and that is, is
mind boggling, right? And we haven't fully understood that,
but we, we, I say we in, in the
sense of the scientific community, uh, neuroscience community. Um,
UNDERSTAND a lot of about the, the ways in
which the brain self-organizes, uh, which is a hallmark
of a complex system. And for example, uh, you
know, we, we know quite well that the brain
has different areas of, um, which is, which is
responsible, which are responsible for different parts of of
brain activity, uh, some of them for consciousness, some
of them for instinctive behaviors, some of them for
immediate, you know, um, reactions, um, unconscious. And They
are made of the same stuff, and yet they
do different things. Um, SO that's emergence right there.
And um, One property, you know, out of exhibits
all of the properties of of complex systems, all
of the features. One of them, which to me
is is really fascinating is robustness. Which is, I
mean, one type of robustness that the human brain
has is It keeps the same temperature within just
a few tens of degrees, always, no matter whether
it's summer or winter, um, humid or dry, um,
so it has a self-regulating. Um, PROCESS constantly going
on, which is an emergent feature because individual neurons
couldn't do it. Um, So that's one basic type
of robustness, which is really important for survival, the
way we we've evolved. And the other type of
robustness, which I find fascinating is a uh a
kind of a Well, it's a kind of an
error correction. If parts of the brain are damaged,
other parts are able to take over the tasks,
not always and not generally, but that is possible.
So, um, that is a form of of adaptive
behavior combined with the robustness that the brain exhibits,
um. And Yeah, I'm not a neuroscientist, so I
couldn't tell you exactly how these things are are
explained and modeled, but the idea is, which is
why it's so much fun to be a complexity
scientist, because you can, um, you can actually, you're
being paid to know a little bit about a
lot of things. And that is what I know
about neuroscience is, you know, these, these different aspects
which are Truly concepts from complex systems are being
studied and applied in, in, for example, human brain.
Mhm.
Now, I also have other episodes where I've talked
about complexity science applied to different kinds of scientific
disciplines. So if people want, they can go and
watch them. So let, we've already gone through examples
of scientific fields and certain specific phenomena that complexity
science applies to. Let me uh now ask you
a different kind of question. Can the behavior of
a complex system be predicted?
It sounds like the answer should be no, because
we had all this stochasticity and emerging things that
individuals, you know, elements, uh, do not exhibit. And
this is. Where these, there are two phrases that
are being used and That are, I think confusing
people. One is complexity comes out of simplicity and
simplicity comes out of complexity. It seems like, you
know, either one or the other has to be
false. But both of them are true in certain
senses. So what I think what we've talked about
so far is how complexity can come out of
simplicity. So you put a bunch of things together
that individually can't do much. So a bunch of
ants individually, you know, they run around in circles
and die. Together they form these fantastically complex societies.
Um, THAT looks like complexity comes out of simplicity.
At the same time, we see examples where simplicity
comes out of complexity in the following sense, where,
you know, you put 1023 atoms in a container.
And close it off, and you will observe that
the pressure, the temperature and volume relate to each
other in a very precise mathematical way. That seems.
I mean, that is something terribly simple that comes
out of. 10 to 23 elements that interact with
each other in, you know, uh uncountable ways. And
so the beauty of complexity science is that it
can deal with both. So what it does is,
you know, out of these myriad of interactions between
ants, let's say, a simplicity emerges at the same
time as a complexity, and the challenge of the
science is to extract these simplicities and to make
them into models, and these models are then The
good models are able to extract just as much
as they need out of the emerging structure, for
example, and simplify it as such so that it
does become predictable. And, and economics that is being
done more and more, um, I mean, Don Farmer
is a beautiful example of of extracting the, the
regularities out of this seemingly terribly complicated system that
makes it. Not deterministically predictable, but it, it makes
us able to predict um. Probabilities. Mhm.
So, I have one last question. Then earlier on,
we talked about uh the relationship between different, these
different kinds of scientific fields like uh cybernetic systems
theory, dynamical systems theory, and complexity science itself. But
is complexity science one single scientific theory, or is
it more of a collection of branches from different
sciences?
We argue that complexity science is. Well, it's it's
a scientific theory that relies on other theories. So
what is, what does that mean? Um. I, I
would say the and it. You know, 11 answer
to the question is complexity science is a way
of thinking. Which is why to link it back
to the initial very early ideas of making it
a teaching institution, I think is still so relevant.
Because we're not thrown by um By the idea
of stochasticity. Um, GENERATING order. And that is a
way of thinking. And using models from other disciplines
um for a system is a way of thinking
and approach to science, and that was also the
idea of the 1980s that we want a new
approach to science, using statistical mechanics to study voting
behavior, for example, is, is a new approach to
the science of social systems. Um, And that, in
that sense, one could say complexity science is not
a single theory. Because it is. It is sort
of, you can think of it as a a
hub and spokes. So a hub would be all
the different mathematical and computational tools that we have
coming from physics, from mathematics and computer science, and
the spokes are reaching out to the different disciplines.
Um, AND out comes something like computational neuroscience, which
connects mathematics and networks and uh concepts of computer
science with theory of the brain. Um, WHICH is
now its own scientific theory sort of emerged out
of ideas from complexity science, I would argue. Um,
SO that is a longer way of saying complexity
science is not a scientific theory, um, it's a
connection of scientific theories. It's, it's one way to
think about it.
OK. Since we still have time, let me just
ask you one more question then. I mean, since
you mentioned earlier on that complexity science is a
fairly young science, um, how do you look at
its future? I mean, do you have any ideas
about that, about what to expect from complexity science
in the near future?
My outlook for complexity science is very positive. We
are, I mean, we are in a in a
phase where the problems we're facing are, are all
about complex systems. We spoke a little bit about
climate already, um, you know, we're in the midst
of climate change, and that requires the concepts and
tools of complexity science, um. And, and that is
what is going on in, in research institutions uh
that do complexity science. They, they involve complexity sciences
more and more. But yeah. Um, THE same is
true with social systems. Um, I mean, by now
we are so many people on this earth that
it's, there's hardly any community that's disconnected from the
rest of, of, uh, of humanity. And that leads
to Well, opportunities, but also to lots of problems,
um, you know, how do we, how do we
agree on using the resources that the Earth offers
us. I mean, there's a connection between climate science
and social science, um, and that to attack these
problems, complexity science in my view is key because
it provides ways of thinking about how many interactions,
so negotiations between individuals, between individuals. Uh, COMMUNITIES, individual
countries, um. Can lead to an outcome which we
want, right? So the idea is here or the,
the challenge here is to to not just describe
what is going on between uh the different actors.
But to provide models that can help not just
predict also control. Control in the sense of achieving
an outcome that we want. And there it's a
huge challenge for complexity signs. And it's the challenge
that we're absolutely Yeah, we, we have to take
on and we are taking on uh to tackle.
Climate change to tackle, you know, polarization in in
the political systems that we're observing, uh, more and
more, uh, writing the year 2025 and Um, Massive
changes are are ongoing. So, the future of complex
designs is bright in the sense that the problems
we're facing are problems of complex systems.
Mhm. Great. So the book is again, what is
a complex system. I am leaving a link to
it in the description of the interview. And Doctor
Wiesner, just before we go apart from the book,
are there any places on the internet where people
can find your work?
Yes, there is my personal website, Kavia.org, and there
is also the website of my research group at
the University of Potsdam, uh, which is uni minus
Potsdam./complexity minusscience.
Great. So I'm also adding that to the description
down below. So thank you so much again for
taking the time to come on the show. It's
been a really informative conversation.
Thank you very much.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Fredrik Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alexandam Castle, Matthew Whitting Berarna Wolf, Tim Hollis, Erika
Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the Matter
Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Neevs called Holbrookfield governor Michael
Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnseroro and Hal Herzognun
Macha Joan Labrant John Jasent and Samuel Corriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David Sloan
Wilson, asilla dearraujurumen ro Diego Londono Correa. Yannick Punter
Darusmani Charlotte blinikolbar Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back medicine, Gary
Galman Sam of Zallidrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price,
Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti Gabrielon
Corteseus Slelitsky, Scott Zachary Fitim Duffyani Smith Jen Wieman.
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianeau, Luke Lovai Giorgio
Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams, Diocosta, Anton
Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Corale Chevalier,
bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, old Eringbo. Sterry
Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grayigoren, Jeff McMann, Jake
Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson,
Chris Storry, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda
Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman,
Perkrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam Dunaway, BR
Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula Gudinov, Gregory
Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos
Net. A special thanks to my producers. These are
Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernard Curtis
Dixon, Benedict Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin,
Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden, and
to my executive producers Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan
Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.